---
slug: "/blog/2020-11-13"
date: "2021-11-13"
title: "The Ides of March"
tags: "musings"
---

I remember the anticipation, the intoxicating scent of violence charging the air in our 5th year classroom. The furtive
glances as the clock ticked steadily - like the beating of a tribal drum - and the moment grew near. It was a still morning,
ashen light painting our solitary building in somber shades of grey, and even the birds nested in their concrete nooks
seemed to wait hushed with bated breath. The Ides of March had come, and this group of students knew that tradition demanded a
sacrifice, drawn forth from the loins of our most innocent. And there he sat, cold light pooled around him as if to signal the
import of his station - a boy known by many names, but today only one that mattered: Caesar. He sat rigidly, chin held high, eyes
forward, the pride of his namesake written into his posture as though he were cast from marble. And though to a casual observer,
he appeared confident and composed, the more percipient among us could see the subtle fear in his eyes. Perhaps he recognized
the fragility of his stratum. Or perhaps it was the shock-still silence, where even the most guarded thoughts could not
help but expose their dark intents against the vacant backdrop. But whatever the reason, one thing was clear: today would be
marred by the kind of callous brutality that can only be invoked by those bound to creed or country.

And it was at this moment when the klaxon sounded - loud and forceful and cruel - and our world erupted into a blur of savage
resolve. Students poured into the dark halls, gripping freshly sharpened pencils with white-knuckled fists, and the veil of
secrecy was left tattered and torn as surrounded our quarry. There Caesar stood, eyes filled with a desperate comprehension,
half-formulated utterances forming on his lips as he frantically surveyed the mob. At that moment, we locked eyes. For the
briefest moment, time seemed to slow down and stop entirely. I saw in those eyes what was to come, a most mechanical future.
And in this space, a single phrase escaped his lips: "I had a dream it would end this way..." Then we set upon him. Pencils
found flesh, recording the violent whims of their bearers in shades of crimson and carmine. His shrieks of pain filled the
halls, a cacophony hearkening back to the days of our forefathers who had instituted this bloody praxis. Shrieks melted
into sobs, sobs into whimpers, and then only the dull thudding of stylus impaling muscle and sinew. And then, as if ordained
by some force, the students dispersed, leaving only a huddled figure slumped against the side of a locker.

I stood there for a while, until the figure began to stir. A low moan escaped his lips, and I reached out a steadying hand
to help him into a sitting position. His tunic had been shredded and stained, punctured by a thousand different hands, but the
skin underneath was intact and unbroken, already healed. He looked up me, resigned. Not a word was exchanged, as I sank down
next to him. Together, we sat in silence and in the distance, we heard the birds singing.


