---
slug: "/blog/2020-06-17"
date: "2020-06-17"
title: "Building a lightweight Redux clone with React Context"
tags: "technical, front end, React, coding"
---

[Redux](https://redux.js.org/) can be a great tool for state management, but it also requires a fair deal of boilerplate in order to get up and
running. For smaller apps with less global state, it may make sense to use an alternative model framework or the [Context
API](https://reactjs.org/docs/context.html) that that is now baked into React. But for someone who is more familiar with Redux paradigms, the concept of Providers
and Consumers can be a bit foreign. So, we're going to build a Redux-like state manager that doesn't require any additional
libraries or frameworks to implement in React. Let's get to it.

## State Provider
The first thing we need to is create the means to initialize and access our state. We'll create a `context.js` file in our app directory and
declare a function expression to create a context that is initialized with an empty object.
```javascript
import { createContext } from "react";

export const StateContext = createContext({});
```

Next, lets create a new hook `useStateContext` so we can access our state from our components.
```javascript
import { createContext, useContext } from 'react';

const StateContext = createContext({});
export const useStateContext = () => useContext(StateContext);
```

And finally, we'll add a wrapper component `StateProvider` that takes two props: `reducer` and `initialState`. This
is what we'll use initialize our state and provide it to our children components. Note that we are using the [`useReducer`](https://reactjs.org/docs/hooks-reference.html#usereducer) hook that
comes natively with React. This hook acts similarly to a typical reducer function, taking a previous state and an action, and returning a
next state. It also passes us a `dispatch` method that we can use to affect that state (more on this later).
```javascript
import React, { createContext, useContext, useReducer } from "react";

const StateContext = createContext({});

export const StateProvider = ({ reducer, initialState, children }) =>(
  <StateContext.Provider value={useReducer(reducer, initialState)}>
    {children}
  </StateContext.Provider>
);

export const useStateContext = () => useContext(StateContext);
```

## Reducers
Now, we can create the reducers that our app will use to modify the state. Let's make a directory called `state` and inside
that directory we'll create an `state/index.js` file. This is where we will merge and export our root reducer from. Now, we'll
create a new file called `state/application.js`. This will be our first "chunk" of state. Any additional chunks should be
appropriately named and placed in similar files. In `state/application.js`, we'll declare our reducer and initial state.
```javascript
export const state = {
  darkMode: false
};

export const reducer = (state, action) => {
  switch (action.type) {
    case 'updateMode':
      return {
        ...state,
        darkMode: action.data
      };

    default:
      return state;
  }
};
```

This is exactly how we would do things in Redux. Now, we can import our chunk of state and its corresponding reducers into the
`state/index.js` file that we created before. Here, we merge all the chunks of state, namespacing them with some identifier and
then we do the same with our reducers (just like [`combineReducers`](https://redux.js.org/api/combinereducers)). Now, when we pass
the root state to the `reducers` function, it will dereference that state and pass it to the appropriate set of reducers.
```javascript
import { state as appState, reducer as appReducer } from "./application";

export const initialState = {
  app: { ...appState },
};

export const reducers = ({ app }, action) => ({
  app: appReducer(app, action)
});
```

## Hooking up to the application
We've got our `StateProvider` to initialize and store our state. We've also got our reducers to affect the state. Now, let's hook
everything up to our application. Inside our `App.js` file (or whatever you decided to call your root component) all we need to do
wrap our children with the `StateProvider` and pass the reducers and initialState that we just created as props.
```javascript
import React from "react";

import { StateProvider } from "./context";
import { reducers, initialState } from "../state";

const App = ({ children }) => (
  <StateProvider initialState={initialState} reducer={reducers}>
    {children}
  </StateProvider>
);

export default App;
```

Now, when we start up our app, the reducers and initialState will be passed to `useReducer` and the returned state and dispatch function will
be available via our context, since we passed them to the `values` prop in the `StateContext.Provider`.

## Accessing state from components
Now, we can use our `useStateContext` hook to access our context from components with the expression `const [state, dispatch] = useStateContext();`.
Let's log the state and see what it looks like.
```javascript
import React from "react";
import { useStateContext } from "../app/context";

const MyComponent = () => {

  const [state, dispatch] = useStateContext();
  console.log(JSON.stringify(state, null, 2));
  
  return <div />
};
```
This gets logged as
```json
{
  "app": {
    "darkMode": false
  }
}
```

If we want to dispatch an action to change the mode with our `dispatch` function, we can do as follows
```javascript
import React, { useEffect } from "react";
import { useStateContext } from "../app/context";

const MyComponent = () => {

  const [state, dispatch] = useStateContext();

  // set the darkMode to true on mount
  useEffect(() => {
    dispatch({ type: 'updateMode', data: true })
  });
  
  return <div />
};
```

And with that we have created our own Redux-like state manager, just using React Context. No `redux` or `react-redux` necessary. Home for dinner.
