---
slug: "/blog/2020-06-27"
date: "2020-06-27"
title: "A Comparison of React Architectures: Static Site Generators, Server Side Rendering, and Dynamic Single Page Applications"
tags: "technical, front end, React, architecture"
---

Modern web development can be a daunting experience for newcomers. The ecosystem is constantly shifting, with new technologies and
best practices emerging and resolving with the relentlessness of a young Robin Williams. But keeping up with this ecosystem can be a rewarding
endeavor. After all, these technologies are being created to assist and abstract the development of amazing things. So, to help clarify the current
set of options available to anyone looking to write a web app, we're going to break down the three patterns that are currently enjoying
the spotlight: statically generated, server rendered, and dynamic single page applications. This isn't about which is better than the other - we
want to avoid falling into the trap of declaring a "winner". This is about doing an honest evaluation on the strengths and weaknesses of
of each architecture. As the developer, it's your responsibility to determine which is most appropriate solution for your particular project.


## A Brief Overview of Each Architecture
### Static Site Generators (SSG)
Static sites are nothing new. We've been building static HTML sites since the advent of the Internet. It's fast and easy, and it's what the web
was built to do. But as the user experience expectations have shifted and there is a demand for more dynamic content on the client-side, the 
idea of serving static HTML has fallen to the wayside, replaced by JavaScript-laden applications that are built to be as responsive and engaging as possible.
But this has a drawback. JavaScript bundles can be large, and this increases the time it takes for the browser to both download and execute our
client-side code. Static site generators solve this problem by **prerendering the HTML at build time** and then serving that HTML dynamically at runtime. This
can drastically increase our apps performance, but also has some downsides if our site requires the frequent refreshing or reloading of data. It
also presents a different way of thinking about the runtime, where it's no longer the JavaScript code that is responsible for rendering every
aspect of our application. Many static site generators - including [Gatsby](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/) - also offer a suite of build-time optimizations, like bundle splitting,
prefetching, and statically compiled data sources for free.

### Server Side Rendering (SSR)
Server side rendering also solves the latency issue brought on by a large JavaScript bundle by **rendering the HTML at runtime on the
server-side** and then serving that HTML to the client. This can provide a performance enhancement since rendered HTML is sent from the 
server on the first request. Traditionally, server-side rendering has implied that every screen is rendered on the server, but with React
we can simply render the initial screen and then pass off execution to the client. In this way, we get both the benefits of a an app that is initially
loaded server side plus the fast subsequent loading of a client-side app. Popular server-side React frameworks - like [Next.js](https://nextjs.org/) - 
include a suite of features for optimization and developer experience.

### Traditional Single Page Applications (SPA)
A traditional single page application has two components: a root HTML file that is served from some CDN, and then a static JavaScript bundle that is
loaded into that HTML, where the **content is rendered entirely on the client-side**. This means the there a performance cost incurred
and the user will see either a blank white screen (or a loading indicator) during the initial loading of the app. Once the JavaScript has loaded,
the execution is handed off to the client, where it's handled entirely by the client-side JavaScript. Plain React SPAs are typically built using multiple other
libraries and much of the development tooling is handled entirely by the developer.

The architectures can be broken down as follows:
* **Static Site Generation (SSG)** - renders the HTML at build time
* **Server Side Rendering (SSR)** - renders the HTML at runtime *on the server*
* **Traditional Single Page Applications (SPA)** - renders the HTML at runtime *on the client*

It should be noted that all of these architectures are technically "single page applications", as they are rendered into a single root HTML page.

In the following sections, we'll do a comparison of each architecture based on relevant categories and give each a rating from 1 to 5.

##  Simplicity
### Static Site Generators - *5 / 5*
Static is simple. And frameworks like Gatsby abstract the complicated aspects of the build process, making things even easier. Rendering your HTML
at build time makes it easier to detect tricky run time errors, and creates a set of static files that are easily served from your CDN of choice. The
entire transpilation and bundling process is handled internally, so there is no need to configure Webpack and Babel.

### Server Side Rendering  - *2 / 5*
Doing things server-side mean that, well, we need a server. We can't simply provide static JavaScript through a CDN, like the other options. This
means that in addition to configuring our client-side and build process, we also need to manage a server. This may not seem like a big deal at first,
but this has some widespread implications. First off, a server is a live running process, which means that we now have a service which requires
active monitoring. It requires the developer to be familiar with Node.js, or server-side languages. It means that the cost of running the website
will increase, as that uptime costs more than something intermittent, like a CDN. Luckily, there are solutions out there like [Vercel](https://vercel.com/)
and [Netlify](https://www.netlify.com/) that enable this kind of server-side rendering as a service. But you still see the issue.

### Traditional Single Page Applications - *4 / 5*
The deployment of a typical SPA is fairly straightforward. We build our bundle and then we upload that bundle - and any static assets - to some
CDN. The difficulty comes with the fact that all the aspects of the build process need to be directly managed. We'll need to configure Babel to 
transpile our code and Webpack to build the bundle. We'll need to add the appropriate loaders and modules to create things like source maps or
inject environment variables. The fact that we're not using a development framework in this case, means that there is more overhead for the
developer. We can use things like [Create React App](https://reactjs.org/docs/create-a-new-react-app.html) to set up our initial code base, but
frameworks like Gatsby and Next.js just simplify the entire build process in a drastic way. However, normal SPAs are just very simple, in that they
consist of only 2 moving pieces.

## Performance
### Static Site Generators - *5 / 5*
Static is also fast. The browser can immediately display the page before the JavaScript even starts loading, so we don't get the typical white
loading screen that we would see in a traditional SPA. Gatsby also automatically splits our bundle by routes (and other ways, if desired) and
does prefetching. All of the HTML has already been rendered, so we don't incur any sort of rendering cost on either the client or the server.

### Server Side Rendering  - *4 / 5*
Server-side rendering also tends to be fast. The browser can immediately display the page before the JavaScript is executed in this case too.
And - in React apps - once the app initially loads, then it hands off the execution to the browser, so we also get the benefits of normal SPAs, as well.
There *are* cases with complicated apps where the server rendering time incurs a cost that is comparable to client-side rendering times.
As usual, it depends on the use case.

### Traditional Single Page Applications - *3 / 5*
Without any kind of optimizations, client-side rendering can be fairly slow initially. It requires both the downloading and execution of a fairly large (~4-10MB)
bundle of JavaScript code at runtime. Because the user doesn't actually need all that code when the app loads, we can use techniques like bundle splitting
to help reduce the load time for our screens. But this requires additional configuration and still doesn't solve the problem of the initial time
between the loading app and the rendering of the HTML. With that said, once the app has been loaded, it can be a very performant and rich experience.

## SEO
### Static Site Generators - *5 / 5*
Because the HTML is all prerendered and available with the execution of any JavaScript, static sites have excellent searchability. All of the SEO techniques
are immediately visible to any web crawler - all of our meta tags and content can be immediately read after the first fetch. Most static site builders also include
out-of-the-box SEO optimizations as well, making them very effective at giving our site visibility.

### Server Side Rendering  - *5 / 5*
Like static sites, SSR sites score very high in terms of searchability because the HTML is available immediately. Because of the initial performance benefit,
we also get a speedy load time, which benefits the site's SEO. Traditionally, there were cases were SSR could hurt the SEO because increased page load times,
but with our React-based implementation, this is no longer a concern.

### Traditional Single Page Applications - *2 / 5*
SEO is difficult in traditional SPAs because the HTML being rendered is dependant on the JavaScript being loaded. This means that our initial load time
takes a hit, which reduces our searchablility. It also means that web crawlers designed to crawl HTML may not have access to some of our app's resources.
Hopefully, SEO techniques with adopt a more SPA-friendly approach in the future, but for right now it is a challenge.

## Features
### Static Site Generators - *5 / 5*
Most static site generators today have a whole array of plugins and features that can drastically simplify the development process. Gatsby, for example,
provides plugins for image loading and manipulation, build time data fetching, dynamic page creation, and a million other things. It also provides bundle
splitting, prefetching, hot reloading, has a GraphQL-based query system for any and all resources, and dynamically loads our static resources. The point
being that using a static site generator in no way limits us from adopting the latest and greatest in front end.

### Server Side Rendering  - *5 / 5*
Because we are serving our app on an actual server, we also have access to all the things that a server can do. This means we can set up our
own API endpoints that can be deployed as Lambdas as deploy time. We also have more direct control on how and when the HTML is rendered and hydrated.
Additionally, modern SSR frameworks like Next.js provide CLI tools for development and have lots of official and community-driven plugins.

### Traditional Single Page Applications - *3 / 5*
The good thing is that we have direct control over our entire development and build process with typical React apps. The bad thing is that we have to
configure a lot of it ourselves. 

## Flexibilty
### Static Site Generators - *3 / 5*
As the name would imply, SSGs are very good building static sites. But whenever there is the need for something more dynamic, that requires the frequent
loading of data, many of the benefits of SSGs go out the door. That static compilation and building of data is no longer nearly as valuable in this case.

### Server Side Rendering  - *3 / 5*
SSR is good for rendering content-heavy screens. It is useful for many cases, but also could be considered overkill for many of the common use cases.

### Traditional Single Page Applications - *5 / 5*
If we're willing to take the initial hit on our load time, then traditional SPAs are very good a presenting dynamic content in a performant manner. It
also makes it easy for us to rapidly create and deploy React apps without the overhead of a server.

## Conclusion

As always, it depends on the use case. If we're building a simple site, like a blog, we may want to consider using SSG, as we can get all of the benefits with none
of the downsides. But if we want to build a more dynamic web app, we should consider SSR or a typical SPA. If we're concerned with maximizing performance
and SEO - or building any lightweight back end APIs - then we should consider using SSR. If we just want to build a solid, dynamic application that in the
simplest way possible, then a traditional SPA could be the answer. If you're looking for a more in-depth exploration of the various render cycles given these different methods, I suggest
you give [this article by Jason Miller](https://developers.google.com/web/updates/2019/02/rendering-on-the-web) a read.