---
slug: "/blog/2020-06-28"
date: "2020-06-28"
title: "A Review of Oishii Bento"
---

Black clouds filled the sky, thunder rumbling in the distance. Or was that my stomach? I was running low on energy and knew it wouldn't be long before I was completely spent. I needed sustenance and Sushi Boat was going to provide it to me. I left my respective place of sanctuary and hit a desperate lurching walk up the street. It wouldn't be long now. Just a little further. As I turned the corner and saw the unlit store front, I knew all hope was lost. I ran towards the store and pounded on the glass, screaming, begging to be serviced. But it was of no use. It was closed down and I was poop out of luck. The Boat had failed me. I fell to my knees as the strength left my legs and closed my eyes, visions of Buffalo Chicken Rolls and other traditional Chinese cuisine dancing before my eyes as I slowly drifted into unconsciousness...

...I awoke to the sound of laughter, drifting lazily towards me, and cautiously opened one eye. Across the street, standing out starkly against the inky black of night, was a brightly lit window topped by a glowing neon sign. I tried to make out the name. Oishii Bento? I made my way across the dimly lit street and opened the door into a world of light and colors. Inside were several large screens flashing ads in Korean, a kindly looking woman in traditional garb standing behind the register, and a group of schoolchildren standing off to one side, chatting about Dota or drifting in some foreign dialect. It appeared I had somehow been transported to Korea. Was this a vision or some cruel quantum mishap?? I didn't know, but I did know that I needed to eat, and fast. I approached the counter and ordered the "Teriyaki Chicken Bowl" and the "Philadelphia Roll" (both traditional Korean dishes) and took a seat. After several minutes, my meal was ready. I took my bag from the kind old women and used what little Korean I knew. "Cao!" I said, using the Korean word for "Thank you" and walked towards the door, smiling to myself as I thought about what that old woman would think about the polite, young Westerner who had magically appeared in her little store. The stories she would tell! Then I stepped out the door...

...and suddenly I was back in Oakland! I gasped, the harsh city air filling my lungs with the toxins they had become so accustomed to. Was I dreaming? I spun around, but the restaurant was gone. Yes, a dream then. Nothing more. Then I looked down. I was still holding the bag of steaming food. Dumbfounded, I sat down there in the middle of the street and ate the best ******* meal of my life, silverware and all. Later in the life, doctors would tell me I had experienced what is commonly referred to as a psychotic breakdown, that I'd imagined it all. And sometimes I agree. But deep down, I know that the kind Korean woman and the Oishii Bento shop are just off somewhere helping someone else like me. Maybe we could have been together. In another time, another place. But not here..... Not now.

4/5 clams.